+++
title = "The Mass Shooting Epidemic"
date = "2022-06-24"
author = "Gabe Houts"
cover = ""
description = "Just since the school shooting in Uvalde, Texas, about a month ago, there have been over 50 deadly mass shootings in the United States. In the current state of constant gun violence, no one is safe."
draft = "true"
type = "posts"
+++

## Introduction

Gun violence is ravaging the United States, and this is nothing new. Although it can be easy to become desensitized to the issue, that’s the very problem itself. The U.S. has become so used to heinous acts of gun violence that only the worst of them even make the news cycle. One of the few ways to try and suppress the effects of, and prevent future mass shootings is to take strong measures to catch the possibility of these incidents online before they happen, and control the flow of deadly weapons making their way into the hands of violent people. The desensitization to these incidents has made it difficult to make any progress in the effort to prevent further attacks. However, it’s becoming increasingly difficult for most Americans to ignore the problem as we watch hundreds of innocent citizens and children die to gun violence.

## Case studies of recent cases

The purpose of this section is to provide in depth analysis of recent civilian involved mass shootings that have taken place within the United States. While there have been countless examples to use just in the past month, only a few, which have an outstanding narrative involving their digital footprint, will be selected for the purposes of this article. These breakdowns are in no way meant to subtract from the severity of the crime, or disrespect those who lost their lives.

### Buffalo Tops supermarket shooting:

On May 14th, a white gunman opened fire onto shoppers at the Tops supermarket in Buffalo, New York. Being in a predominantly black neighborhood, 11 of the 13 people shot in the incident were African American. Due to this fact, the killings are being treated, and investigated, as a racially motivated hate crime. The 18-year-old suspect, Payton S. Gendron, was initially charged with only first-degree murder. However, since the killings he has been indicted of 25 more charges, including manslaughter, attempted murder, and domestic terrorism. 

Many major crimes involving gun violence are categorized as domestic terrorism, meaning an act of terrorism committed on American soil by an American national. As defined in U.S. code law, the term “domestic terrorism” means activities that involve acts dangerous to human life that are in violation of the criminal laws of the United States or of any state, and appear to be intended to intimidate or coerce a civilian population. By both the legal and social definition of the phrase, the Buffalo shooting, and many other cases, fit the terms of the charge. These terrible crimes are often those fueled by racism and hate, and display the deep-rooted, systemic corruption in the United States that encourages people to hate and even kill others because of their ethnicity. Due to the overwhelming evidence, the gunman was found guilty of racial hate crimes, as well as domestic terrorism.

The buffalo shooting is a prime example of an incident that could possibly have been prevented through investigation of the digital evidence. In the mounths prior to the shooting, the suspect was extremely active online making comments and threats in online forums. Later, he made a racially fueled manifesto and posted it online. Although we aren’t yet sure whether they would have been able to identify the suspect and prevent the incident, the lack of investigation is very concerning. In a statement made after the shooting, the Buffalo Police Department stated that they weren’t aware of the manifesto or online threats until after the shooting occurred. If law enforcement had better online investigation tools, or had proper watch dogs been put into place, these threats could have been relayed to the proper local law enforcement. While some intelligence agency might have been aware of this online activity, it was not properly handled which is outraging considering the fact that in vital situations like these simply relaying information could have saved lives.

### Uvalde, Texas school shooting:

On May 24th, just 10 days after the fatal shooting in Buffalo, another shooting took place at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas. 18-year-old Salvador Ramos shot and killed nineteen students and two teachers, and critically wounded seventeen more.  The subject, once again a mere 18-year-old, was a high school student in Uvalde, and a well-known member of the community. Ramos worked a local job just long enough to save up to buy two long riffles on his 18th birthday. On the day of the shooting, Ramos critically injured his grandmother, who reported him while being treated for her injuries. Ramos fled the scene before entering a shootout with police, who left the firefight to wait for backup. Later, Ramos made his way to Robb Elementary, where the deadly incident occurred. 

Initially, the public knew little about the incident. As time has passes, more details about the events leading to the incident, and the police response have come to light. First off, it’s important to note that in the time surrounding the shooting there has been a cloud of misinformation and contradictory statements from police and public officials. At the time of writing, the investigation is still ongoing, and I’m sure that we will learn even more about the incident. That being said, what is known so far points strongly to the fact that the police response before and during the shooting was inadequate. Before the shooting, it was well known within the circle of high school students that knew Ramon that he was a potentially violent person. After the shooting, it was found that there were many cases of people, mostly high school students, calling Ramos a school shooter in online chats. While most of these messages could possibly be chalked up to dark jokes, many seemed concerning and could have tipped off police to the possibility of the crime had it been reported. Another frightening part of the investigation into the particular shooting is how poor the police response was during the shooting. It’s known that during the shooting, the suspect barricaded himself in a locked classroom of the school with several children inside. However, later in the investigation it was found that the door was never locked, or barricaded, while police stood by and waited for backup instead of providing a proper response to the shooting situation. The actions of first responders during the shooting are both shocking and horrifying to see. It’s apparent that there was a gross lack of training in the police force, and that they were in no way prepared for this type of situation. I encourage anyone reading to do some digging for yourself and look at the details coming out during the ongoing investigation. This investigation is squaring up to be a very long and politically charged one considering the conversation surrounding gun control laws, and the fact that the Uvalde police force seems to be doing whatever it can to cover up some important details surrounding the fatal shooting. It’s very possible that more lives could have been saved had the training of the Uvalde Police Force been better before the shooting.

While negating the possibility of a shooting through the control of deadly weapons is the only failsafe way to prevent violence, its certain that no measure will be absolute. With the prevalence of the used and independent gun market, there will always be ways for especially violent individuals to obtain weapons. Because of that possibility, it’s still very important to have measures in place to protect people from violence, and to catch the signs before shots are fired. It can no longer be ignored that just like the rest of society, crime is also shifting to the internet. If more funds and time were put into training and building up a digital police force, many lives could be saved. Studies have shown that most domestic shootings have evidence posted online more than 24 hours before the incident. Recent cases of gun violence have shown us that law enforcement is not properly equipped or trained to detect these online threats and prevent them. If we began paying more attention to these signs, the lives of American citizens and children could be saved.

## So how can we fix it?

These are just two of many deadly shootings that have happened in the past few months. Just since the school shooting in Uvalde, Texas, about a month ago, there have been over 50 deadly mass shootings in the United States. In the current state of constant gun violence, no one is safe. It’s easy to brush off the reports of shootings and become desensitized, easy to believe that it will never affect you personally. But as we’ve been showed time and time again, anyone and everyone can experience the effects of gun violence. Not all gun violence happens on the streets of Chicago. Not all mass shooting happens at schools. Gun violence is such a deeply rooted dark piece of the American culture that it has become prevalent everywhere. Because of how easy it is to obtain deadly weapons, even with the intent of murder, nowhere is safe. 

While the problem of easy weapon access and violence have grown, so have the challenges involved with trying to make change and start reigning in number of avoidable deaths that occur as a result of gun violence. The conversation of gun control has become unnecessarily politicized. Its not a question of taking away an individual’s right to bear arms, it’s a matter of taking measures to keep deadly weapons out of the hands of people who intend to use the for the harm of others. The first, and most necessary step, is to raise the legal purchasing age of automatic weapons to 21. Data shows that 68% of school shootings are committed by those under 21, and 56% of all shootings are a result of people under 21. Although no measure of control is ever absolute for anything, that one simple measure could nearly half the number of deadly shootings taking place in the United States. Other measures that could help include more intense background checks, and requiring a mental evaluation to purchase automatic weapons. The only way that the possibility of an act of gun violence taking place could be negated is to keep the firearms out of the hands of the mentally unstable or violent people who often commit such crimes.

With all that said, the answers are never clear, but its easy to see that the problem is there. Thousands of innocent Americans die at the hands of gun violence every year. I encourage everyone to do the necessary research and continue the conversation about how terrible these killings are, and how they could be prevented. Problems resulting in the loss of innocent human life are not to be ignored.  A safer and less violent society is in reach, but because of the political climate little change is being made. Gun violence won’t be fixed by turning a blind eye. So, let’s start making change.



-Gabe Houts

---

Have any questions, comments, or concerns? Please dont hesitate to [contact us](/contact-us)!
<feedback@skepticaltechnologist.org>